The great educational movements, like all great ideas, are specific to their time and place.

Loris Malaguzzi and Maria Montessori both lived through Italian Fascism, and they both responded by investing in children. But Montessori, left with war orphans, developed a system in which children could quickly become independent, and in which there was no place for parents (for there were no parents). Malaguzzi, in contrast, played a role in school built (literally) by the community, and thus created a much more external-facing system for early childhood. Likewise, the founder of Sudbury Schools founded a school movement based on principles of extreme autonomy and independence, in line with the rebel poet revolutionaries of the 60s and 70s. 

Problems in alternative education systems like these arise when we don't examine the time and place in which the systems came about, or in which we fail to consider childhood development. Or when we take things to the extremes, as I feel the Sudbury Schools have. 

Both Reggio Emilia and Montessori are, as intended by the creators, intended for 0-6 year olds, give or take. It is early learning, not meant for higher level learning. It is developmentally appropriate for children age 0-6, give or take, who learn primarily through play, and are not yet developmentally ready for higher order thinking. 

I think part of the issue is people commit - "I'm a Montessori parent," "I'm a Waldorf parent," "I'm a public school parent" etc. We are all looking for belonging and community, and with the devaluation of both geographic community and religious community, we can, temporarily, obtain a sense of belonging by selecting a specific pedagogical style. But we became too attached to these styles, which are not intended as appropriate for every stage of a child's life. 

To me, and I have much more research to do, an ideal style is: play-based from 0-6. Montessori, Reggio Emilia, Waldorf, Nature, just regular old preschool: you probably can't go wrong if the child is with consistent caregivers and given freedom in a developmentally appropriate environment. Parents should be extremely involved at this stage, because for kids, parents and the home are still the center of their world. Because reading, writing, and speaking are our primary forms of communication, I do think it's appropriate to teach children early, often, and in very short bursts as they're open to it. Many frequent opportunities for learning and practice, but no homework, and no stress. Perhaps there's clear signs a child should be tested for dyslexia though, especially if it runs in the family. Can it run in the family?

Ages 6-12, children reach a new developmental level. Toward the end of this stage, parents and the home are no longer central to the child. The child will naturally and correctly become more interested in others. The child's cultural norms develop during this time, and they are able to begin engaging with higher level thinking. At this stage, math, science, and history, as well as reading, writing, speaking, and possibly more focused language, sports, and arts and music times are appropriate. 

Our bell schedules make no sense. They do not give children time to deeply engage with and enjoy their work. And in many schools, they leave children working at a frantic pace, or just staring at the clock ticking down the time to the bell. I also think at this stage, children should still be generalists. It's important to expose them to as much as possible, so that they (and we as parents) can see what they gravitate towards, what interests them, what they're good at, what they're naturally disinclined to. 

I think there's a tendency with today's parents to be like, okay you're not very inclined on this one subject, so we're going to get you tutors and you must spend a lot of time on it and master it. If it's reading or speaking or writing, I think that's probably appropriate to a certain extent. But Chemistry? If you're just not that inclined to chemistry (I wasn't), and you're not enjoying it, wouldn't your time be better spent finding out what you are good at and you do enjoy? Spoken from someone who has spent a lot of time forcing themselves into round holes. 

That doesn't mean children should never be pushed outside their comfort zone. To the contrary, I'm very glad I was pushed into/chose a career for a time that forced me to get better and public speaking and speaking to others, because no matter what job (or no job) you choose in this world: you need to be able to communicate comfortably and even persuasively with others in both speech and writing, and the sooner you get comfortable with that the better.

So 6-12 are the generalists. Expose them to as much as possible. Get them to read as much as possible and about as many topics as possible. Give them as many experiences as possible. And make sure they've mastered the fundamentals in reading, writing, speech, and basic math. As well as character and ethics, because the teen years are coming up.

Then we have 12-18. Congratulations. Even though our society doesn't treat them this way, you have a small adult living in your home. They haven not lived as long as you, and they may not know as much as you, but they have developed sense, independence, and it is your job as a parent to help them to flourish, not to block their development. 

On a side note, all these articles about "you're not really grown until 25, no 35, no 45!" I find to be deeply unhelpful. Of course our brain continues to mature until it reaches some peak, hopefully not too early, and then begins to recede. So do our bodies. But this phenomenon is not an excuse to treat our fourteen year olds like three year olds or like seven year olds. 

So by age 12/13, we should feel really solid in our kids basic knowledge, their values, and their character. And now is the time to give them space to find out who they are. Society at present has a tendency to encourage generalization. I think some generalization at this age is of course appropriate, but it's also appropriate to start letting and even encouraging kids find their niche. You, at some point, are very likely going to have to work for money. The entire world is your oyster. Any child in American can, at this point, aspire to do any job in America. This is a blessing and a curse. If we don't impart on our children the tools to determine what they excel at, what they love, and to get started, we deprive them of entering early adulthood with independence and a focused approach to the world. 

I think the above makes me sound like a tiger mom, and I probably am to some extent. When I see Sudbury School graduates who are just going to community college and seem really like burnouts versus like little rocket ships excited to explode out into the stratosphere, I feel sad. So much potential wasted. A burned out teenager, and I mean burn out in the sense of exhausted or drug-addled, is a travesty. Young people should be the least jaded, the most idealistic, the most excited to tear out into adult world. An as parents and educators, it is our duty to do everything in our power to help them feel that way. 

But all of this, as I started with, is a reaction to my regrets. I look back at my 18 year old self, walking into a world-acclaimed university with all the resources in the world, and I had no idea how to go about taking part in any of them. 

I want every child in the world to turn 18 filled with idealism, joy, and concern for others. 

I think we spend too much time scaring kids in schools about social ills and problems. Kids should leave school energized and inspired to solve problems; not dejected and scared that problems exist. Problems will always exist. Inequality will always exist. It is part of the human condition, I think. 

Documentation creates accountability and visibility; allows you to track trends and reflect backwards; allows you to celebrate yourself; allows you to easily invite others into your world to get new perspectives and supporters. 

Regardless of your feelings on religion, it seems fair to say that if certain credos have lasted thousands of years of human history, they might be worth listening to, and that we don't need to throw away the baby with the bathwater. We need to feel belonging, we need to feel holiness, we need to feel a sense of purpose, and religion has filled that for humans since time immemorial - why are we so eager to end it, so that we can sacrifice ourselves on the alter of consumerism? 

I really like Mohel's thoughts on what we need: moderation, celebration, and holiness. Childhood at a Jewish day school was very fun, because you always have a celebration coming up to break up the monotony. Having a child has taught me how important monotony/routine is, but also how boring it can be, and how important it is to celebrate to break up that monotony and look forward to it again. And the holiness that gives purpose to everything that you do. 

I do think she makes a good point about women around my age who have children making our children our next project. I worry that I might be doing that: focused too much on Ronan and not enough on the broader issues. That's why I think homeschooling has to be a no-go: it centers my life around my child, but that's not right. I've always intended for my life to be centered on deeds of loving kindness. The world stands on three pillars: torah (study), avodah (prayer), and gemilut chasadim (acts of loving-kindness). 

What movements do we see right now? Increased homeschooling, trad life, and gentle parenting. In other words, extreme involvement and investment in our children, perhaps in response to the message that you can "have it all" when in fact you can't have it all. 

Unschooling is developmentally inappropriate. Children, especially ages 6-12, need guidance and structure, and in fact they grave it. I might not be so opposed to a Sudbury type school at ages 12-18, when children come in with a basic of knowledge, interest, and passion, and are given the time and opportunity yes to have fun and socialize, but also to get better at other things. (I don't want to fall into the idea of an academic sweatshop. Of course kids should have fun and socialize at school, that's at least half the point. But they should also have goals, take classes, and get things done.)  Freedom is meaningless without clarity of purpose. Even I, a 36-year-old woman, crave clarity and structure as I figure out this next stage of my life.

It is way too easy to buy stuff for our kids, buy stuff instead of asking a neighbor for a hand me down, buy a consultant instead of asking for help from a friend. Our society has become so transactional as a result. I'm sorry, but I don't want to Venmo you $12 to go to book club. I want to show up at your house with a bottle of wine because I'm your friend.  Nearly all of my social interactions during the day involve the exchange of money. It's crazy. 

"Free Coffee" experiment. Come sit and chat with your neighbors. 

Working parents don't have time to get to know other parents. Refer back to the Substack I read. Up early, get my workout in, off to work for 12 freaking hours, home for bedtime with my laptop open, asleep. I also, sorry, think this is an incredibly selfish way to live. Your kids do need you, and they deserve your attention. 

So what do I DO with all of this information and all of these thoughts? How do I support others with deeds of loving kindness? How do I build community? 

And what do I want this first essay to be about? 





THE FOCUS ON HUNTER-GATHERERS IS LEADING MODERN PARENTS ASTRAY (STOP PRETENDING YOU'RE A HUNTER-GATHERER)
Focusing on hunter-gatherer parenting techniques is a reaction to our opposite way of life, but it doesn't prepare children for the world that we live in. 

Hunter gathering parenting advice is prevalent in modern society 

Like all education/parenting debates (and maybe everything) it's an understandable reaction to societal norms that feel, and likely are, bad, and a desire to get back to our roots

But there's major issues with this movement that can negatively impact children

A new way forward 

